CHUCKEY, Tenn. - The legendary Perigord black truffle has found its way to East Tennessee, and chefs everywhere are a bit giddy.

Thomas Michaels, a botanist and plant pathologist in Chuckey, has figured out how to grow the famed fungi in the tree root system of hazelnut and oak trees. He's harvested his first crop.

Knoxville chefs were his first customers, paying roughly $800 per pound, which is cheap considering the world market price is more than $2,000 per pound.




The Perigord truffle, aka the Black Diamond, considered an aphrodisiac by the Romans, is as hard to grow as icebergs in Florida.

The tricky mushroom requires the right soil, the right climate, the right tree root for colonizing and then a kiss from the muses to prosper. Plus, it doesn't hurt if you have a doctorate in plant sciences.

Tuber melanosporum, its proper name, varies in size from a pea to roughly a chicken egg. They will only grow in loose, humid, sun-drenched soil. They need cool, wet nights, where their little mycelium (tiny hair-like filaments) nestle and find nourishment in tree roots.

Michaels says his harvesting season has just ended. It lasted from January to the end of February. By March, the odd-looking, knobby, coal-black mushrooms have faded and are in their tree root homes, doing what comes naturally.

The smelly but celestial-tasting fungi were once prevalent in southern France and harvested by the ton. Today, the yield is down to roughly 10-50 tons per year worldwide.

Soon, Michaels will elaborate on such topics and his plantings on the Tennessee Truffle Web page. It is not up yet but will be soon, Michaels says.

Michaels, 59, comes by his mushroom expertise almost by birth. He grew up on a mushroom farm in Illinois. His father grew and sold plain variety button mushrooms. In college, he studied organic chemistry and later earned a Ph.D. in botany and plant pathology from Oregon State University.

In 1976, while finishing his doctorate, a couple of wealthy bankers had occasion to eat the Perigord while yachting off the coast of France. The bankers discovered the scarcity of the Black Queen and its high price on the world market and decided to fund a grant at Oregon State.

It so happened that Michaels was writing his dissertation at the time on "In Vitro culture and growth modeling of Tuber species and inoculation of hardwoods with T. Melanosporum ascospores."

He found that the finicky fungus responded well to nitrates and "sweetening" of the soil with lime - tons of lime, which turn acidic soil into alkaline-rich ground, which T. Melanosporum just loves.

After moving to Greeneville, he began looking around for a farm, finding hillside land in Chuckey, about 20 miles west of Johnson City. Here, he planted 350 hazelnut trees on about 9 acres, using only about three 3 acres for rows of trees.

Michaels says there are about 60 species of truffles, but roughly only a dozen are considered culinary qualified. And of that number, the Perigord is at the top of the food chain.

There is, however, a real catch-22 with the Perigord.

The musk (musque in French) truffle is very, very similar to the Black Queen. It takes a true-eyed truffle expert to tell the difference. In some cases, less-than-honest truffle spore salesmen will pawn off the musk for the Perigord.

The aggressive musk is the kudzu of truffle fields. It will crowd out the fastidious Perigord and then colonize every tree root system around.

Michaels says the best soils in Europe for the Queen are in earth with an abundant percentage of clay.

Of course, East Tennessee has its own version of clay. It's red and ubiquitous but needs a lot of help if it is going to grow anything but weeds.

"Thirty tons of lime per acre" is how Michaels beats East Tennessee red into sweet submission.

That way, he arrives at the optimum pH of 7.6 to 8.1. "About the only other thing that will grow is asparagus," he says.

Michaels planted his trees is 2000, starting out plants that were about 16 inches tall. The hazelnuts are now 10-12 feet tall, and the soil around them bubbles with birth.

Harvest season runs from December through February. But the ripest black beauties are found in the midsection of that season.

Michaels says a good orchard can produce maybe 50 pounds per acre. "If I could do one-fourth to one-half pound per acre, I could retire in a few years," he says, showing off his hair-trigger smile. A normal yield, he says, is 10-20 pounds per acre. "This is about 80 percent art and 20 percent science," he says. AP-CS-03-31-07 1200EDT