Going to Water:
A Cherokee Ritual in
Its Contemporary Context
Barbara Reimensnyder Duncan
This essay looks at the historical record and scholarship regarding
this practice in Western North Carolina, adding information from the
author's fieldwork over the last ten years. "Going to water," like other
religious practices of conservative, traditional Cherokee people in this
region, remains a vital part of their tradition. These practices coexist
with Christianity and modern culture, although this coexistence affects
their practice in a number of ways.
The traditional Cherokee people describe themselves as being
"water" people. Rivers are seen as the "The Long Man" with his head in
the mountains and his feet in the sea. This living being plays an impor-
tant part in stories and legends. Water can be a pathway to another
world, as in stories of the Nunnehi. Water can speak and give answers to
people who are fasting and praying.
The ritual of "going to water" takes place at a stream or river. This
ritual was at one time, and for some still is, a daily practice. It may also
be done for specific reasons. Another traditional ritual - using the sweat
lodge - includes plunging into water to close the ceremony. This is
different from "going to water." Christian baptism, while it has been
compared to "going to water," is also a different ritual.
Because of the importance of water in Cherokee beliefs, practices,
legends, and myths, it is safe to say that their use of water for religious
ceremonies probably dates back thousands of years. Taking the most
conservative view - even if we were to say that the emphasis on water
94 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • Volume Five, 1993
had been shaped by their living in the southern Appalachians, and even
if we were to take the most conservative archaeological view, that the
Cherokee had only been here five thousand years or so - (which tenure
seems to be in the process of being extended by recent archaeological
finds) - Cherokee water rituals may be at the minimum several thou-
sand years old.
The documentation of the practice of "going to water" by western
observers began with James Mooney in the late eighteen hundreds, who
believed he was documenting a way of life which was about to disappear.
He collected many myths and legends involving water and, along with
Frans Olbrechts in the 1920s , collected many "sacred formulas" from
medicine people specifically used for going to water (Mooney 1900;
Mooney and Olbrechts 1932).
Mooney also devoted an article to "The Cherokee River Cult":
In Cherokee ritual, the river is the long man, Yunwi Gunahita, a
giant with his head in the foothills and his foot far down in the
lowlands, pressing always, resistless and without stop, to a
certain goal, and speaking ever in murmurs which only the
priest may interpret. In the words of the sacred formulas, he
holds all things in his hands and bears all down before him. His
aid is invoked with prayer and fasting on every important
occasion of life, from the very birth of the infant, in health and
sickness, in war and love, in hunting and fishing, to ward off evil
spells and to win success in friendly rivalries. Purification in the
running stream is part of every tribal function, for which reason
the town house, in the old days, was always erected close to the
river bank.
We shall speak here of ceremonial rites in connection with
the running stream, saying nothing of the use of water in the
sweat-bath or in ordinary medico-religious practice, beyond
noting the fact that in certain cases the water used by the doctor
must be dipt from a waterfall. Two distinct formulistic terms are
used for the rite, one of which signifies "plunging into the water,"
the other "dipping up the water," nearly corresponding to our
own "immersion" and "sprinkling" in baptism. Whenever
possible, the priest selects a bend in the river where he can face
toward the east and look upstream while performing the
ceremony, which usually takes place at sunrise, both priest and
petitioner still being fasting.
At regular intervals, usually at each recurring new moon, it
is customary among the more religiously disposed of the old
conservatives for the whole family to go down together at
Volume Five, 1993 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • 95
daybreak, and fasting, to the river and stand with bare feet just
touching the water, while the priest, or if properly instructed, the
father of the household, stands behind them and recites a prayer
for each in turn, after which they plunge in and bathe their
whole bodies in the river.
Mooney also describes the use of going to water for newborn infants; for
people who have had a family member die; for various kinds of conjuring;
for people who have bad dreams; and as part of traditional preparations
for the stickball game (1900, 30-31).
Raymond Fogelson did fieldwork with the Cherokee on the Western
North Carolina reservation in 1957. He describes some aspects of going
to water, in "The Conjuror in Eastern Cherokee Society" (1958). He
describes "conjuror's" activities at the traditional stickball games:
"Instead of plunging into the stream, the players merely dip their sticks
in water."
A conjuror explains:
When I conjure, I go by the word of God. Everything I do (that) is
good goes by the name of the Creator. My work goes true. In
ceremonies, I use the name of the Lord. When somebody's sick,
you take him to the creek, wash his face by dipping with your
hand, and wet his breast by the heart. It's like the spirit gives
strength, like Baptism. He can feel it. If somebody's lost, it's up
to the Creator to point the direction. Sort of like in prayer. If it
wasn't in the power of the Creator, you couldn't make anything
move. In the past we used the name of the Great Creator, before
the missionaries came. (82-83)
John Gulick in Cherokees at the Crossroads (1960) mentions the
similarities between going to water and baptism; although both ceremo-
nies use water, they are somewhat different in intent. John Loftin, in a
later article, compares traditional Cherokee beliefs and attitudes to the
"Harmony Ethic" used to describe the values of traditional Hopi people.
In this comparison, Loftin says about the Cherokee: "Their land, their
life, and their religion are one." He describes their reverence for the land
as "sacred ecology" (1983,40-41).
The most recent documentation by our western, intellectual culture,
of "going to water," comes from Michael Kline's fieldwork for the Moun-
tain Heritage Center in 1990, approximately one hundred years after
Mooney's fieldwork. Kline interviewed Walker Calhoun, who is still
living in the Big Cove community, and the Mountain Heritage Center
produced a cassette album documenting Calhoun's stories and songs
primarily about dances. Calhoun includes a medicine song and says:
96 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • Volume Five, 1993
Supposed to sing that when the sun shines on the tips of the
trees on the mountains - sun shines just on the tips of the trees,
that's when you're supposed to sing this and go to the branch and
wash your face, put a little on your forehead and on your chest.
[He sings the song]
That's medicine song. Will protect you all day long. When
you think something, somebody, something was bothering you,
kind of an evil spirit, then you do that again.
I learned that from my mama. I don't know where she
learned it. She was a firm believer of these things too. I guess
they was passed down generation after generation, especially
this. (1991, 26-27)
This provides a description of people using "going to water" with
some instruction from their families, as Mooney mentioned.
I have also found that going to water is still practiced. It is one of the
ceremonies that can be done inconspicuously. While the sweat lodge
ceremony requires a fair-sized fire and a lodge, and takes several hours
to complete, "going to water" can be done without leaving any visible
traces and can be completed in just a few minutes. It may be done with a
medicine person, but with proper instruction, it may also be done by
families and individuals.
In spite of these seemingly minimum requirements, people who want
to go to water say that it is more and more difficult to find places to do
so. Not just any stream or any place can be used. I would not attempt to
define what makes a place appropriate for going to water. This is the
province of medicine people who have been trained for many years. One
of them told me in 1985:
It is difficult to verbalize in another language, for another
culture, exactly what makes a place sacred, but I'll do what I can.
There are spirits that dwell in certain places that may be
beneficial to a fast and helpful in other ways to the individual
and to The People when one fasts and prays there. Other things
that make a place sacred are what our grandfathers and their
grandfathers before us have put there, or how the Great Spirit
has shaped the rocks, or the ancientness of the grandfather
trees, or the power of the plants. Our brothers the animals know
these places and come to these places. (1990, 110.)
Usually when folklorists and anthropologists look at a practice "in
context" we are talking about cultural context: we look at stories in the
Volume Five, 1993 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • 97
context of how they are used to instruct children in cultural values; or
we look at the foodways of immigrants and how they are used to cel-
ebrate the immigrants' culture in the context of their new homeland.
But I think it is important to look at "going to water" not in its
cultural context but in its physical, ecological context. Dominant-culture-
intellectuals have a cultural bias to look at religious practices as discon-
nected from the natural world. In native American tradition, religion is
never disconnected from the physical natural world. This has been
recognized to some extent by the Native American Religious Freedom
Act, passed in 1978, which protects access to sacred sites as well as the
use of feathers and other parts of the natural world by traditional native
people.
Without that physical context, there would be no more rituals. While
we westerners can build a church on a new location and still hold Sun-
day morning services, this is not possible with traditional practices.
Again, a traditional medicine person told me:
What makes these places sacred to us is their personality. And
their personality is made up by physical structure, by the four
leggeds, the two leggeds, the winged creatures, the root, the
insect, and water creatures, the combination of these things give
a place its personality. And then these places attract spirits,
which have their personality. When people practice medicine and
they need a certain personality to use in healing ceremonies,
conjuring, or just to help The People. All the things above make
this place sacred. ... If you need to do ceremonies . . . and you go
to this place and the personality which you sought is no longer
there because some of the medicine has been removed, where do
you go then? Our places are narrowing every day. (1990, 114)
The North Carolina legislature has passed recent legislation govern-
ing the uses of watersheds and establishing local guidelines for these
uses. The terms of the guidelines are still being debated. I would encour-
age people in this region of the southern Appalachians to consider all of
our diverse uses of water - recreational, industrial, and ceremonial - as
well as the use of water by plants and wildlife in our decisions for the
future.
98 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • Volume Five, 1993
Works Cited
Fogelson, Raymond D. [1958] 1980. "The Conjuror in Eastern Cherokee Society."
Journal of Cherokee Studies Fall 1980: 60-87.
Gulick, John, ed. 1960. Cherokees at the Crossroads. Chapel Hill: Institute for
Research in Social Science.
Kline, Michael. 1991. "Liner Notes." Where the Ravens Roost ; Cherokee Tradi-
tional Songs of Walker Calhoun. Cullowhee: Mountain Heritage Center
Recordings.
Loftin, John D. 1983. "The 'Harmony Ethic' of the Conservative Eastern Chero-
kees: A Religious Interpretation." Journal of Cherokee Studies Spring 1983:
40-43.
Mooney, James. [1900] 1982. "The Cherokee River Cult." Journal of Cherokee
Studies Spring 1982: 30-45.
the 17th and 19th reports of the Bureau of Ame
Charles Elder.
Mooney, James and Frans M. Olbrechts. 1932. "The Swimmer Manuscript:
Cherokee Sacred Formulas and Medicinal Prescriptions." Bureau of Ameri-
can Ethnology Bulletin 99. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Reimensnyder [Duncan], Barbara L. 1990. "Cherokee Sacred Sites in the
Appalachians." In Cultural Heritage Conservation in the American South.
Ed. Benita J. Howell. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Barbara Reimensnyder Duncan holds a Ph.D. in Folklore and Folklife from the
University of Pennsylvania. She has done fieldwork on folk medical traditions in
her home community in Pennsylvania. For the past ten years she has lived in
southern Appalachia, and has directed a three-year Folk Artists in Schools
Program for Macon County, N.C. At present, Duncan coordinates a network of
teachers in North Carolina who are using the Foxfire approach in their public
school classrooms.
Volume Five, 1993 • Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association • 99