350 trees on three acres, size of chicken egg or black walnut, 
harvest from January to February
Tuber melanosporum
little mycelium (tiny hair-like filaments) nestle and find nourishment in tree roots.

musk is what the roots are inoculated with
 30 tons of lime per acre

trees start out 16 inches tall, grow to 10 to 12 feet tall

a good harvest will produce 50 pounts per acre

In this article, orchard planted in 2011, article is 2022. She is producing truffles.

https://orchardpeople.com/hazelnut-trees-and-truffles/#:~:text=It%20can%20take%206%20to,video%20version%20of%20the%20show.

burgundy truffle end of November to early December

hazelnut trees planted 10 to 12 feet apart

I think for fictional purposes, Horaces orchard can be ready in 9 years.

Give Marnie 2 years to build her lodge.


the type of chef who prepares sauces is a saucier

Recipes:
‘tournedos Rossini’: Truffle on foie gras, on a tenderloin, on piece of toasted bread. With madeira sauce. 
truffle cream sauce: a white sauce with meat
arancini: fried rice balls, Italian, not French
poached trout with hollandaise
artichoke foi gras
mushroom and cheese quice with truffle butter crust
Béchamel Sauce (white sauce from lasagna to moussaka)  You could use it as the French do and make some fancy sauces like mornay or nantuan or soubise.
A mornay sauce is a béchamel sauce with the addition of eggs or just egg yolks and grated cheeses, incorporated just at the end, while the béchamel is still warm and whisked until smooth. One quarter cup of each per cup of milk used is customary too.
Nantua sauce is a classic French sauce made with cream, butter, and seafood. It's often served with fish and shellfish, especially crayfish. 
Soubise sauce is a classic French onion sauce, traditionally made by pureeing softened onions with a béchamel sauce, resulting in a rich and velvety smooth consistency, often served with meats, poultry, and vegetables; it's named after a French nobleman, the Prince of Soubise, who influenced culinary trends during the 18th century. 